Data taken with space telescopes is necessarily resource limited. Building and operating space telescopes is expensive, and there always is more demand for worthwhile investigations than there is observing time. Therefore, it is imperative to make the most out of the data that we have in the archives and to continuously innovate in the data reduction and fitting processes to learn as much as we can.

Yet, the backbone of X-ray spectral fitting today is essentially the same as it was even before the launch of XMM-Newton and Chandra 25 years ago.
Our main objective in this proposal is to develop methods and software to obtain a higher signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) from existing, archival X-ray spectra by developing improved spectral fitting algorithms which make use of more information (such as the cross-dispersion profile for a grating spectrum or temporal changes in the background rate) than the current state-of-the art algorithms. By using this additional information, source photons that are currently discarded can be used in spectral fitting and thus parameters of physical models can be constrained better. In this proposal we concentrate on the analysis of high-resolution X-ray spectra from XMM-Newton/RGS, but the methods developed here can be applied to other types of X-ray spectra as well.

We will demonstrate those methods with an analysis for the X-ray emission from a young Herbig Ae/Be star, where we will test if the soft X-ray component traces a jet collimation shock or if it is coming from close to the star itself (corona or accretion shock).

In X-ray observations, there is a lot of information about each individual photon. The detector position gives the location in dispersion (i.e. the wavelength) and in cross-dispersion direction; the intrinsic energy resolution of the CCDs gives an approximate photon energy that can be used to determine if the photon is compatible with the wavelength expected at that detector location for a dispersive grating or should be considered a background event; the arrival time indicates if the photon is part of a background flare or more likely to be a source photon. Yet, in the current state-of-the-art spectral fitting algorithms, photons are either included or excluded in the spatial/temporal region that is used to extract the source spectrum.
In this proposal, we will develop methods, algorithms, and software that goes beyond a binary photons-in/photons-out approach and uses all available information to improve the spectral fitting going from a 1D fit (wavelength) to more dimensions (wavelength, cross-dispersion, energy, time). Instrument properties tell us the distribution in some dimensions (cross-dispersion profile and CCD energy distribution for a given wavelength). This way, information from photons that are currently discarded can be used to improve the fit and to better constrain the parameters of the physical models that we are fitting to the data.

We will develop three approaches (multi-D fit, split the data into several 1D spectra, modify the likelihood function) and investigate which approach works best in terms of performance and numerical stability for a given dataset. We will then implement the best approach in a software package on top of the X-ray spectral fitting code Sherpa, which is written in Python and already provides the capability to fit data in more than one dimension. Based on two simple prototypes, we expect that, for spectra with a significant background rate, we can cut error bars at least in half. For our example of a young Herbig Ae/Be star that should allow us to distinguish between coronal emission and a jet collimation shock as the source of the soft X-ray emission.

The code that we develop will immediately provide improved SNR for thousands of XMM-Newton/RGS spectra and can be extended (with additional work) to other types of X-ray spectra as well.